+++
title = "Projects | Q2 2019 Update"
description = "Updates on the SpatialOS SDK for Rust and discussion of the work required to reach an initial release."

[taxonomies]
tags = ["project-updates", "rustlang", "spatialos", "website"]

[extra]
toc = true
+++

You may have noticed that these updates are now quarterly. The reason for this is simple. I just don't have enough content to reasonably fill a blog post every single month!

# Website

In the last two months I've migrated my blog & website from [Ghost](https://ghost.org/) to [Zola](https://www.getzola.org/). My experience so far has been good! Its worth enumerating the reasons why I migrated, ignoring morbid curiosity and the typical inability of a software engineer to not twiddle with perfectly good and functional systems.

1. **Plays nice with Git.** Being able to source control the content and design of my website is a huge plus. It also means I can get up CI pipelines to verify any changes or lint any blog posts.
1. **Lightweight.** While Ghost blogs are not necessarily too heavy, with Zola, I have far more direct control over the content that is served. In particular, I have no need for features like a WYSIWYG editor or multi-user support.
1. **Built in Rust.** I like Rust as a language and I want to see it succeed. One (small) way that I can contribute to that is by using tooling built in Rust and advocate for it.
1. **Custom shortcodes.** Zola is very extensible with a robust shortcode system built on top of the [Tera template engine](https://tera.netlify.com/).

## Building a theme

Zola from scratch gives you a _very_ blank slate to work with. There are [some preexisting themes](https://www.getzola.org/themes/), but given how young Zola is, predictably not many. I made the decision to build my theme from scratch, which offered me the opportunity to learn a bit more about HTML and CSS. I knew a few things: 

1. I wanted it to be fast. Minimal dependencies. As little Javascript as possible.
2. I wanted to use [Bulma](https://bulma.io/). I stumbled across this framework in the past and thought it was excellent.

I broke the site down into two main parts: the profile section and the blog section. They should feel connected, but they could be built relatively independently. Fortunately, Zola's HTML supports inheritance. This means that I could define a common base that would describe the header and footer of the website and specialise the content for each of the sections respectively.

## The results

At the time of writing, I'm pretty happy with the results. It looks reasonable good (at least respectably so). There's certainly work left to-do, and I've got a huge list of "oh this would be really cool", but I'm pleased with the base I've built. 

Returning to one of my specifications from above: 

> I wanted it to be fast. Minimal dependencies. As little Javascript as possible.

My homepage clocks in at a cool 500KB and a blog post clocks in at around 240KB, this is pretty good in my opinion. And there is still room for optimisation! This speaks to the power of shipping HTML and CSS rather than use a framework.

There's only ~5KB of Javascript and I'd like to remove as much of that as possible!

# [SpatialOS SDK for Rust](https://www.github.com/jamiebrynes7/spatialos-sdk-rs)

In April, I had the pleasure of giving a talk at the local [Rust London User Group](https://www.meetup.com/Rust-London-User-Group/) meetup! You can find the slides from my talk [on Google Drive](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1lBDfOMS7p-hNlW08Z3xa1Yn7BFXT0aD2Nn1AbKw3a1E/edit?usp=sharing).

To go along with the talk, I built a [small demo](https://www.github.com/jamiebrynes7/rust-ldn-demo) on top of the Rust SDK using the built in Inspector as a visualiser. This gave me a great opportunity to [dog food](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eating_your_own_dog_food) the current APIs. And of course, in the process of building the demo I uncovered bugs and some missing features! 

For example:

- Fixed a memory leak when sending component updates ([#93](https://github.com/jamiebrynes7/spatialos-sdk-rs/pull/93))
- Fixed a bug with code generation and the EntityId type ([#97](https://github.com/jamiebrynes7/spatialos-sdk-rs/pull/97))
- Implemented enums for code generation ([#96](https://github.com/jamiebrynes7/spatialos-sdk-rs/pull/96))

There's nothing like a deadline to spur on development! After building the demo, I felt a little bit burnt out on the Rust SDK and elected to work on other projects for a little while, hence the website rebuild. However, I'm looking forward to getting back into it when I find some free time!

### [The Demo](https://www.github.com/jamiebrynes7/rust-ldn-demo)

The demo was a simple simulation consisting of three main elements: 

- Trees, which contained resources.
- Lumberjacks.
- Wizards, which came in two variants, good and evil.

The mechanics of this simulation were straightforward: 

- Lumberjacks collected resources from the trees and returned them to a base.
- Evil wizards set trees on fire.
- Good wizards saved trees from fire.
- Trees that are on fire have a small chance of spreading fire to their neighbour trees.
- Lumberjacks cannot collect resources from trees that are on fire.
- A tree has a finite number of resources. Once they are depleted, the tree becomes "inactive".

{{ lightbox(src="/blog/rust-ldn-demo-q2-2019.png", caption="A section of the Inspector from the demo.") }}


### The View

While building the demo, I found the current API for handling ops a little bit verbose. The canonical way to receive ops in the Worker SDK is an `OpList`, which describes the stream of network operations received since the last call. The iterative nature of an `OpList` conflicts with how you would typically write "game" code. You would tend to write a `TreeBehaviour` which describes how a tree interacts with the world. However, the `OpList` has ops related to trees interleaved with ops that don't concern trees. Two options for dealing with this are:

- iterate over the `OpList` a number of times, filtering only for the ops which interest you. 
- iterate over the `OpList` once and merge the data into a data structure that describes the "state of the world". This world state can then be queried.

The former could fit quite nicely into Rust iterator semantics, with something like:

```rust
    let op_list = get_op_list();
    let tree_commands = op_list
        .filter_map(|op| match op {
            Op::CommandRequest(req) => Some(req),
            _ => None
        })
        .filter_map(|req| {
            if req.component_id == Tree.component_id {
                Some(req)
            }
            None
        });
```

However, this still leads you to need to maintain your own local world state inside each behaviour, as the `OpList` only describes diffs. This pushed me toward implementing the latter API. This was also the API that I have been used to working with in Spatial contexts. The [C# Worker SDK has an implementation](https://docs.improbable.io/reference/14.0/csharpsdk/using/receiving-data#using-the-view) of this sort of data structure called the `View`. As does the [GDK for Unity](https://github.com/spatialos/gdk-for-unity/blob/master/workers/unity/Packages/io.improbable.gdk.core/View/View.cs), which underpins some of the higher level APIs.

So with that, I set about building a `View` structure in the Rust SDK, which could offer the following APIs for fetching data:

```rust
fn has_entity(&self, entity_id: EntityId) -> bool;
fn is_authoritative<C: Component>(&self, entity_id: EntityId) -> bool;
fn get_authority<C: Component>(&self, entity_id: EntityId) -> Option<Authority>;
fn get_component<C: Component>(&self, entity_id: EntityId) -> Option<&C>;
fn get_command_requests<C: Component>(&self, entity_id: EntityId) -> Vec<(RequestId, &C::CommandRequest)>;
fn get_command_responses<C: Component>(&self, entity_id: EntityId) -> Vec<(RequestId, StatusCode<&C::CommandResponse>)>;

fn was_entity_added(&self, entity_id: EntityId) -> bool;
fn was_entity_removed(&self, entity_id: EntityId) -> bool;
fn was_component_updated<C: Component>(&self, entity_id: EntityId) -> bool;
```

The implementation that I did for the demo worked _fine_, but it was certainly not an ideal implementation. There was a not insignificant amount of unsafe code and I had to reach down to some of the raw C APIs to implement it properly. In an ideal world, this data structure should be implement-able in pure user code. Whether this points to either some design flaws in the Rust SDK or my inexperience of Rust, I do not know. But I wouldn't feel comfortable merging and releasing the `View` in its current state. If you are interested, you can [find the implementation here](https://github.com/jamiebrynes7/spatialos-sdk-rs/blob/feature/view-impl/spatialos-sdk/src/worker/view.rs) (this link may be dead after the branch is merged and deleted!).

One of the more interesting APIs that I stumbled into building with the `View` was an expressive query over the `View`. This allows you to effectively `filter_map` over the `View` with a struct and trait implementation: 

```rust
pub trait ViewQuery<'a> {
    fn filter(view: &View, entity_id: EntityId) -> bool;
    fn select(view: &'a View, entity_id: EntityId) -> Self;
}
```

You can then query the `View` and iterate over matching entities with a single line:

```rust
struct TreeData<'a> {
    pub id: EntityId;
    pub position: &'a improbable::Position,
    pub tree: &'a demo::Tree
}

impl<'a, 'b: 'a> ViewQuery<'b> for TreeData<'a> {
    ...
}

for tree in view.query::<TreeData>() {
    let pos = tree.position;
    ...
}

```

Not only is this easy to use, this allows you to encode that you cannot hold onto data that may be outdated (component data) without an explicit clone through the lifetime bounds on the `ViewQuery` trait. 

This sort of API would _not_ be possible in a language like C# due to the lack of static methods on interfaces. Traits are, of course, a different beast to interfaces, but this is another example of the power of traits.

This example can be taken a little bit further, the implementation of the `ViewQuery` trait on a given data structure are generally pretty formulaic dependent on the data inside that struct. This lends itself to a derive macro! We can eliminate a significant amount of boilerplate in defining these queries in this way: 

```rust
#[derive(ViewQuery)]
struct TreeData<'a> {
    pub id: EntityId;
    // Only match on entities for which we are authoritative over positions
    #[query(authoritative)]
    pub position: &'a improbable::Position,
    pub tree: &'a demo::Tree
}
```

In the end, I didn't have time to implement the derive macro before the demo. Once I tidy up the `View` implementation, its something that's high on my list of things to learn and do. Macros feel like a very powerful mechanism in Rust that I'd love to investigate and use in anger.