+++
title = "Projects | Q3 2019 Update"
description = "Reviewing improvements and changes to this website!"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["project-updates", "website"]
+++

# Website

The last three months, I've focused on building core features, improving workflows, and tweaking the style of this website in lieu of other projects. 

## Kudos Please!

As documented in [my other blog post on Kudos Please](/blog/kudos-please/), I built and deployed an alternative back end (written in Rust!) to power the kudos please feature that you see on the bottom of each blog post.

## Workflows

### Automated checks

I've spent a fair chunk of time building an automated workflow for my website. This encapsulates things like spellchecking blog posts or linting style sheets. 

At the time of writing, I have a small set of checks that run during a pull request and are gates on merging a new post or feature. This allows me to offload the cognitive overhead of these things, maintain a certain quality gate, and focus on the actual content of the blog post.

This workflow is built on a stack of Docker, GitHub Actions, and a Makefile (for a local workflow!). 

{% callout(type="info") %}
For more information on this workflow, checkout **[Github Actions & This](/blog/blog-post-pipeline/)**!
{% end %}

### Shortcodes

I've added a few shortcodes to enable more interactive and expressive blog posts. 

- `figure`<br/>This is a simple shortcode that adds a centered image with an optional caption. It can be used like:
    ```
    {{/* figure(src="/blog/post-footer-new.png", caption="The new footer.") */}}
    ```
    <br/>
- `lightbox`<br/>A slightly more complicated shortcode that builds on `figure` that allows a user to click on the image to give them a bigger view. It can be used like:
    ```
    {{/* lightbox(src="/blog/post-index-compare.png", caption="Comparing post index pages. Old on the left, new on the right.") */}}
    ```
    <br/>
- `callout`<br/>A shortcode that maps onto [the message component in Bulma](https://bulma.io/documentation/components/message/#message-body-only). Supports the dark, info, warning, and danger types and supports Markdown inside the callout body! It can be used like:
    ```
    {%/* callout(type="warning") */%}
    The body of the callout.
    {%/* end */%}
    ```
    <br/>

{% callout(type="info") %}
If you'd like to use any of these shortcodes in your Zola website, you can find the source code [here](https://github.com/jamiebrynes7/website/tree/master/templates/shortcodes). Note that `lightbox` and `callout` rely on [Bulma CSS](https://bulma.io).
{% end %}

## Style changes

I've experimented quite a lot with how the website looks and feels. The majority of these changes have been focused around the look and feel of a single blog post.

- The blog post text is now properly centered and the title section is now centered too.
- All headers now use a different font to the blog body. The contrast helps break up the text.
- Code snippets now use a light theme and have a smoothed edge which makes it feel cleaner.
- I've added a [404 page](/404) that fits with the theme of the website.

## Structural changes

Additionally, I've made some larger changes to the structure of a blog post. The blog post body is narrower and now features a proper footer: 

{{ lightbox(src="/blog/post-footer-new.png", caption="The new footer.") }}

This features the ["Kudos Please" element](/blog/kudos-please/), the tags for a post, and some sharing options.

I've also tweaked the blog post index page, for both a given tag and recent posts. It now offers more information and clearly delineated sections.

{{ lightbox(src="/blog/post-index-compare.png", caption="Comparing post index pages. Old on the left, new on the right.")}}


## Whats next?

There are quite a few crucial missing pieces that need to be built out before I feel that this website is "complete".

1. Crucially, I'm missing pagination support. This means that once I publish more than 10 blog posts the older ones will start to be pushed off the index pages! This is obviously not ideal, but it also means I have a little bit of time before I need to ship this feature. Thankfully, Bulma has [robust pagination components](https://bulma.io/documentation/components/pagination/) so its just a case of feeding the data into this.
2. Add some small animations into page loads and transitions. Nothing too flashy, but something to improve the feel of navigating and browsing the website. I'm on the look for a small CSS library or tutorial on building animations, so give me a holler if you have something to recommend.
3. Bundle the Javascript together. I'm currently delivering up to 5 Javascript scripts on page load. This really should be bundled such that for any given page load, there is one request for fetching Javascript. 

There's also a few nice-to-haves on the to-do list:

1. A dark mode with a toggle. For those of us that prefer dark websites, the bliss of a dark background is a nice break from the blinding brightness that is most of the web.
2. Support table of contents for a blog post. Zola supports page level table of contents, but I'm not sure how to present this to the user from a UI or UX point of view.
3. Small features like [bigfoot.js](http://www.bigfootjs.com/) to enhance the reading experience.
4. Revisit the look and feel of the homepage. It lends itself to a "timeline" view, which may be a more natural way of presenting the information.

Looking toward a larger goal, I'd like to decouple my website and the theme and then _publish_ the theme separately so anyone could use it for their own website. There's still some polish to-do before we hit this point.
